feat: guide for kubara deployment on gcp (#516)
kubara-io/kubara: docs/content/3_infrastructure/gcp.md

# Kubara on GCP

If you want to run kubara on a hyperscaler like GCP, there are specific configurations to make. Here we provide an example that can be conveniently adapted to other major clouds.

> In this example we use provider-native components — Google Secret Manager for External Secrets, and Google DNS with a delegated subdomain (from any domain registrar that allows setting NS records). For any other setup, please check the corresponding component's own documentation. And feel free to contribute! :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Kubara on Google Cloud

If you want to run kubara on a hyperscaler like the Google Cloud, there are specific prerequisites you have to configure before getting started with the actual kubara setup. On this page we provide an example that should be easily adaptable to other major cloud providers.

In this guide we use the following provider-native components:

* Google Secret Manager for External Secrets
* Google DNS with a delegated subdomain (from any domain registrar that allows setting NS records)
* Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) for the Cluster provisioning

For other cloud providers, please check their documentation to find the corresponding services they offer. Feel free to contribute your guides! :)
```

> We assume you're starting from an empty GCP project to test kubara, and that you've already made yourself familiar with the [kubara deployment guide](../1_getting_started/bootstrapping.md) — please do that first if you haven't.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We assume you're starting from an empty GCP project to test kubara, and that you've already made yourself familiar with the [kubara deployment guide](../1_getting_started/bootstrapping.md). Please do that first if you haven't.
```

!!! note "Before you start"

>     1. GKE **Autopilot** isn't compatible with the privileges `kube-prometheus-stack` needs (its `node-exporter` requires host access that Autopilot blocks), so this guide uses **Standard** mode instead — see the cluster-creation parameters below.
>     2. Velero on GCP hasn't been tested as part of this guide — please follow the [official Velero project docs](https://github.com/velero-io/velero-plugin-for-gcp#setup) instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. GKE **Autopilot** isn't compatible with the privileges `kube-prometheus-stack` needs (its `node-exporter` requires host access that Autopilot blocks), so this guide uses **Standard** mode instead. See the cluster-creation parameters below.
    2. Velero on GCP hasn't been tested as part of this guide. Please follow the [official Velero project docs](https://github.com/velero-io/velero-plugin-for-gcp#setup) instead.
```

## Local Prerequisites

Before starting, the [gcloud CLI](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install) is required, along with an already authenticated account (`gcloud auth login`) with access to the target GCP project.

> You'll also need kubara installed — see the [Installation guide](../1_getting_started/installation.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll also need kubara installed. See the [Installation guide](../1_getting_started/installation.md).
```

> ### Sneak preview:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## TLDR: Summary
```

Reviewer: title is personal preference but the indentation is wrong and should be fixed

> 1. We will generate a .env-File and fill in all values, after that generate the config.yaml and fill it out too. (kubara init (--prep))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. We will generate an `.env` file and configure all necessary values, after that generate the config.yaml and fill it out too. `kubara init (--prep)`
```

> Then we will generate all the rendered Helm-Charts. (kubara generate)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we will generate all the rendered Helm-Charts: `kubara generate`
```

2. We will create and configure a GKE Cluster, set up Google Secret Manager, configure Google DNS with an existing domain by delegating a subdomain for ExternalDNS and set up SSO.

3. We will create, check and adapt the following values files:

All paths below are relative to the `platform-configs` directory that `kubara generate` writes for you. We'll check and adapt the following Helm values files:

- `platform-configs/gcp/helm/argo-cd/values-gcp.yaml`
- `platform-configs/gcp/helm/external-dns/values-gcp.yaml`
- `platform-configs/gcp/helm/external-secrets/values-gcp.yaml`
- `platform-configs/gcp/helm/kube-prometheus-stack/values-gcp.yaml`
- `platform-configs/gcp/helm/oauth2-proxy/values-gcp.yaml`

> 4. We will then create our necessary secrets and deploy kubara on GKE. (kubara bootstrap)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. We will then create our necessary secrets and deploy kubara on GKE. `kubara bootstrap <my-cluster>`
```

Let's start!

> ## Part 1: Preparing for gcp deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Part 1: Preparing the Google Cloud deployment

Let's get started with the actual setup!
```

```bash
# Install gke-gcloud-auth-plugin – required so kubectl can authenticate against the GKE cluster
gcloud components install gke-gcloud-auth-plugin

# Set the project

> gcloud config set project $YOUR-PROJECT-NAME

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gcloud config set project [YOUR-PROJECT-NAME]
```

```

> Follow the kubara [Bootstrapping Guide](../1_getting_started/bootstrapping.md), generate your helm charts and stop before bootstrapping [Step 4: Bootstrapping](../1_getting_started/bootstrapping/#4-deploying-argo-cd). Everything else we be handled in this Guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the kubara [Bootstrapping Guide](../1_getting_started/bootstrapping.md), generate your helm charts and stop before bootstrapping [Step 4: Bootstrapping](../1_getting_started/bootstrapping/#4-deploying-argo-cd). The bootstrapping will be handled as part of this page.
```

```bash
# pseudo-workflow, please check the up2date official guide!

kubara init --prep # generate .env-file & set values accordingly
kubara init # generate config.yaml & set values accordingly
kubara generate # generate helm charts

> # Stop after generating your Charts and proceed with ## Part 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Stop after generating your Charts and proceed with "Part 2: Google Cloud Infrastructure"
```

```

> ## Part 2: GCP Infrastructure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Part 2: Google Cloud Infrastructure
```

```bash
## check for existing networks/VPC
gcloud compute networks list
```

If no suitable network exists, one can be created from scratch, including a router, a subnet (with secondary ranges for pods/services), and Cloud NAT. 

!!! note "Optional: Example how to create a new network, router, subnet & Cloud NAT"
    
    Please be careful and adapt these commands to your needs before applying:

    ```bash title="Optional Network component creation"
    ## OPTIONAL: create network & nat router
    gcloud compute networks create test-network --subnet-mode=auto

    ## router
    gcloud compute routers create test-router \
        --network=test-network \
        --region=europe-west3

    ## subnet
    gcloud compute networks subnets create test-subnet \
        --network=test-network \
        --region=europe-west3 \
        --range=10.0.0.0/24 \
        --secondary-range=pods=10.4.0.0/14,services=10.8.0.0/20

    ## cloud nat
    gcloud compute routers nats create test-nat \
        --router=test-router \
        --region=europe-west3 \
        --auto-allocate-nat-external-ips \
        --nat-all-subnet-ip-ranges
    ```

### Create the GKE Cluster

> ```bash title="GCP Cluster creation"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash title="GKE Cluster creation"
```

    --release-channel=regular \             # Update channel for automatic cluster upgrades (regular = balance between stability and new features)
    --machine-type=e2-standard-4 \          # VM type for worker nodes (4 vCPUs, 16 GB RAM)
    --num-nodes=1 \                         # Number of nodes at startup (per zone)
    --enable-autoscaling --min-nodes=0 --max-nodes=3 \  # Cluster autoscaler: scales automatically between 0 and 3 nodes
    --spot \                                # Uses cheap Spot VMs (can be reclaimed by the provider at any time – not suitable for critical workloads without tolerations)
    --disk-size=30 \                        # Boot disk size per node in GB
    --workload-pool=$(gcloud config get-value project).svc.id.goog \  # Enables Workload Identity: Kubernetes ServiceAccounts can securely impersonate GCP IAM service accounts, with no key files at all
    --async                                 # Command returns immediately without waiting for cluster creation to finish
```

#### Restrict Control Plane / API Access to Your Own IP

> `--enable-master-authorized-networks` only allows explicitly permitted IP ranges to reach the Kubernetes API — following the principle of least privilege. For test purposes, your own public IP is enough; in a production environment, you would instead enter fixed CIDR ranges for bastion hosts, VPNs, CI/CD runners, etc. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`--enable-master-authorized-networks` only allows explicitly permitted IP ranges to reach the Kubernetes API. Following the principle of least privilege. For test purposes, your own public IP is enough; in a production environment, you would instead enter fixed CIDR ranges for bastion hosts, VPNs, CI/CD runners, etc. 
```

```bash
## Restrict control plane / API access to your own IP:
gcloud container clusters update test-cluster \
    --zone=europe-west3-a \
    --enable-master-authorized-networks \                  # Restricts access to the control plane API to an allowlist of IP ranges
    --master-authorized-networks=$(curl -s ifconfig.me)/32 # Adds only your own public IP (as a /32, so exactly one address) to that allowlist
```

#### Wait for the Cluster & Check the Connection

```bash
## Wait until the cluster is ready (status: RUNNING)
gcloud container clusters list                                    # Lists all clusters in the project including their current status

## Generate credentials (kubeconfig) for the cluster
gcloud container clusters get-credentials test-cluster \
    --region=europe-west3-a                                       # Writes connection details for test-cluster into the local kubeconfig, so kubectl can access it

## Check the connection
kubectl get ns                                                     # Lists all namespaces in the cluster – fails if the connection/auth is broken
```

## Part 3: The Platform

#### OAuth2 Configuration

> How exactly these configurations are done depends on the chosen SSO provider (examples see the [SSO guide](../4_building_your_platform/sso/add_sso.md) for details) — regardless of the provider, however, at least the following SSO apps must be created for SSO:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How exactly these configurations are done depends on the chosen SSO provider (examples see the [SSO guide](../4_building_your_platform/sso/add_sso.md) for details). Regardless of the provider, however, at least the following SSO apps must be created for SSO:
```

    --member="serviceAccount:external-dns-sa@$(gcloud config get-value project).iam.gserviceaccount.com" \
    --role="roles/dns.admin"

# Bind Workload Identity (note: requires the matching namespace – kubara's default is the chart name, so "external-dns" here)
gcloud iam service-accounts add-iam-policy-binding external-dns-sa@$(gcloud config get-value project).iam.gserviceaccount.com \
    --role="roles/iam.workloadIdentityUser" \
    --member="serviceAccount:$(gcloud config get-value project).svc.id.goog[external-dns/external-dns-sa]"

# Create the GCP managed zone
gcloud dns managed-zones create kubara-gcp-zone \
    --dns-name="subdomain.your-domain.com." \
    --description="Subdomain Zone for GKE kubara" \
    --visibility=public

# Print the zone's nameservers – these are then entered at the domain registrar as a delegated subdomain
gcloud dns managed-zones describe kubara-gcp-zone --format="value(nameServers)"
```

<!-- TODO: add example screenshot of a delegated subdomain at the registrar -->

Next, the `values.yaml` for external-dns needs to be adjusted.

See: `gcp-test/platform-configs/gcp/helm/external-dns/values-gcp.yaml`

> ```yaml title="../platform-configs/gcp/helm/external-dns/values-gcp.yaml"

Reviewer: I think this path is wrong and shouldn't be used here as it is from your local setup

```suggestion
```yaml title="Values for External DNS"
```

Reviewer: Or

```suggestion
```yaml title="../platform-configs/<my-cluster>/helm/external-dns/values-gcp.yaml"
```

# set project id in service account annotation
external-dns:
  provider: google
  google:
    project: "<your-gcp-project-id>" # your project
  domainFilters:
    - "subdomain.your-domain.com" # your zone
  serviceAccount:
    create: true
    name: external-dns-sa
    annotations:

>       iam.gke.io/gcp-service-account: "external-dns-sa@<your-gcp-project-id>.iam.gserviceaccount.com" # here!

Reviewer: here?
```suggestion
      iam.gke.io/gcp-service-account: "external-dns-sa@<your-gcp-project-id>.iam.gserviceaccount.com"
```

```

### External Secrets

> ```bash title="Ext. Secret GCP Configuration"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash title="External-Secret Google Cloud Configuration"
```

# 1. Create a Google service account
gcloud iam service-accounts create external-secrets-sa \
    --display-name="GKE Kubara External Secrets SA"

# 2. Grant the service account permission to read secrets (Secret Accessor)
gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding $(gcloud config get-value project) \
    --member="serviceAccount:external-secrets-sa@$(gcloud config get-value project).iam.gserviceaccount.com" \
    --role="roles/secretmanager.secretAccessor"

# 3. Link the Kubernetes ServiceAccount via Workload Identity
gcloud iam service-accounts add-iam-policy-binding external-secrets-sa@$(gcloud config get-value project).iam.gserviceaccount.com \
    --role="roles/iam.workloadIdentityUser" \
    --member="serviceAccount:$(gcloud config get-value project).svc.id.goog[external-secrets/external-secrets-sa]"
```
 
```yaml title="../platform-configs/gcp/helm/external-secrets/values-gcp.yaml"
external-secrets:
  serviceAccount:
    create: true
    # exact same name as the GCP service account you created in the previous step
    name: "external-secrets-sa"
    annotations:
      # associate the Kubernetes service account with the GCP service account

>       iam.gke.io/gcp-service-account: "external-secrets-sa@google-project-xyz-xyz-0abc.iam.gserviceaccount.com" # replace with your service account

Reviewer: maybe add the same comments to the external-dns values file example above
